**S**tructured **Q**uery **L**anguage

https://www.codecademy.com/article/sql-commands

A _relational database_ is a database that organizes information into one or more tables. Here, the relational database contains one table.



### Statements

```sql
CREATE TABLE table_name (  
   column_1 data_type,  
   column_2 data_type,  
   column_3 data_type  
);
```


### Create
to create and define a table's value types
```sql
CREATE TABLE celebs (  
   id INTEGER,  
   name TEXT,  
   age INTEGER  
);
SELECT * FROM celebs;
```

### Insert
used to insert ROWS 
	Technically isn't altering the table, just inserting new data to it
```sql
INSERT INTO celebs (id, name, age)  
VALUES (1, 'Justin Bieber', 22);

SELECT * FROM celebs;
```

### Alter
used to insert COLUMNS
	by default, this new column will assign a null value to all existing rows if not defined. Alter actually alters how the table is defined, with a new column.
```sql
ALTER TABLE celebs  
ADD COLUMN twitter_handle TEXT; 
```

### Select
Fetch data from a table.
	* is a special character that retrieves data from ALL columns
```sql
SELECT name FROM celebs; /* fetches only the NAME column
```

### Update
to update a value (set) at id = # (row) in table (update)
```sql
UPDATE celebs  
SET twitter_handle = '@taylorswift13'  
WHERE id = 4;
```

### Delete 
Delete one or more rows from a table
	- use 'WHERE' to identify where you want to delete 
```sql
DELETE FROM celebs  
WHERE twitter_handle IS NULL; 
```

### Constraints
- the 'PRIMARY KEY' can be used to deny duplicate of a row
- 'UNIQUE' is to have different values in each row of a column (names)
- 'NOT NULL' to check if a value is... not *null*
	- "  DEFAULT 'Grammy'  " to set a value in a column of a new row to a default value if no value is specified

```sql
CREATE TABLE awards (  
   id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,  
   recipient TEXT NOT NULL,  
   award_name TEXT DEFAULT 'Grammy'  
);

```

### Review
SQL is a programming language designed to manipulate and manage data stored in relational databases.

-   A _relational database_ is a database that organizes information into one or more tables.
-   A _table_ is a collection of data organized into rows and columns.

A _statement_ is a string of characters that the database recognizes as a valid command.

-   'CREATE TABLE' creates a new table.
-   'INSERT INTO' adds a new row to a table.
-   'SELECT' queries data from a table.
-   'ALTER TABLE' changes an existing table.
-   'UPDATE' edits a row in a table.
-   'DELETE FROM' deletes rows from a table